# Why We Need Universal Healthcare

Healthcare is about helping people. From a patient's perspective, if you break a leg, it's about fixing it. If have cancer, it's about treating it. From a medical doctor's ethical perspective, it's about providing that care to the best of medicine's knowledge.

Health insurance is an insurance business like any other. This means paying for multi-million dollar cancer treatments, or covering a million dollar surgery to repair a leg crushed in an automobile accident. However, the objective of business is to generate a profit and expand. The only way for insurance to generate a profit and expand is to, as a general rule, not pay out on claims. To put this more bluntly, the very existence of private health insurance companies is dependent upon its refusal to provide its services to its paying patients precisely when they are in their most dire time of need. This seems to me to be the most egregious form of murderous business practice, for it's very survival depends on stealing money from those who cannot afford it, and then, in some cases, killing patients when they begin to actually need it.

Given that this means a significant number of people have died and will die, a word that comes to mind when considering this practice is genocide. That the conservative right&mdash;ironically, often white Christians&mdash;generally support this form of socially destructive business practice seems counter to the pro-life agenda; this is hypocrisy at its finest and an absolute disgrace to all Americans. This barbaric practice is especially egregious when one considers that several other developed nations on this planet provides universal healthcare, with far greater healthcare outcomes than America's privatized industry.

But what of the Affordable Care Act, which many on the right scornfully name "Obamacare" as though using the President's name will readily signal how disgusted they are by it? The ACA is not, contrary to what people like Ben Shapiro would have us believe, universal healthcare. Universal healthcare is a single, universal system that provides care to people, separate from the question of cost. The ACA is a federal and, in some cases, state provided health insurance exchange. Well, it has its problems. But the real problem with the ACA is that it is not enough. It is not the kind of universally provided healthcare that other countries have come to know and cherish.
