# Belief and The Atheist Position

## What is Belief?

Just what do atheists believe? Lots of things. We believe in food, water, cars, bridges, roads, lots of things we can see and interact with. Atheists also believe in some things they haven't directly witnessed. I've heard the planet Mars exists, though I've never been there. I believe in it though. I've never seen God either, and I don't believe in Him, though I once used to. Why do I continue to believe in the planet Mars yet not in God?

It's important here to distinguish a key concept regarding belief. Belief is the acceptance of a statement as being true. Before belief, we are agnostic about a given statement. If you were to ask a young child whether he believed the sun was 9,940.73&deg;F he most likely wouldn't know. It would be correct to say that the child doesn't believe the statement to be true, but it would be incorrect to say he believed the statement to be false. On this particular point, at a young age, not having yet been exposed to matters of astronomy, the child would be agnostic in regards to that statement. He would not yet have formed a belief. Lack of belief does not in itself constitute an assertion that a thing is false. What we're talking about here is the position of not being convinced of the truth of a given statement.

If the child were to be told by his mother that the sun is 9,940.73&deg;F, then, being young, he would most likely believe it. He would believe it because of the trust he has in his mother as a provider and an authority. But can we say the child's belief in the temperature of the sun is rational? We could argue that, since the child has limited capacity to validate claims, his belief in his mother's word is the wisest thing he can do at the time. But, from his perspective, her claims are unverified. As he grows older he would be wise to learn to think rationally and to consult the evidence directly to see whether the claims he encounters are true. Once he is capable of thinking for himself it would be wise for him to validate claims made by considering the evidence directly.

Consider if the child's mother made another claim&mdash;that she was once abducted by aliens. Would it be rational to believe this? From the young and naive child's perspective, perhaps. But for the critical thinker this would be an irrational belief. Why? What is the difference? The difference is that one belief is empirically demonstrable while the other is not. The truth of the statement has nothing to do with the silliness of the claims and everything to do with whether they are demonstrated by evidence.

## Naturalism

What is naturalism? Well, there are two philosophical variants of naturalism:

*   Philosophical naturalism: This is the assertion that nothing outside of the natural world exists; there is no supernatural "reality".
*   Methodological naturalism: This is the view that there may or may not be something beyond the natural world. However, given that we are bound by the natural senses, we are unable to sense the supernatural in a reliable and consistent manner. Therefore, under methodological naturalism, we simply treat claims of the supernatural as unfalsifiable. Until someone demonstrates a method of testing the supernatural in a reliable and repeatable manner that I can detect with my senses, I am justified in treating claims of the supernatural as invalid until proven true.

## The Burden of Proof

When someone asserts a statement as true, they are said to carry the burden of proof. Because they are asserting the truth of a statement, if they wish anyone to believe them, they must not just assert their claim, but also demonstrate the truth of their claim. They must do this in a clear, concise, and repeatable manner. If the individual making the claim is unable to provide a clear and concise demonstration of their claim, and others are unable to repeatedly and reliably demonstrate any evidence in support of the claim, then the claim is discarded as meaningless and without merit for further consideration. This is how western civilization has functioned for hundreds of years. To put it in contemporary terms, actions speak louder than words.

When someone making a claim has failed to provide the necessary evidence in a repeatable manner, that person has failed the argument. Imagine someone claiming that Martian aliens had visited them. Why would you believe this? You would want to see the aliens yourself. Yet without evidence, you dismiss claims of alien abduction as the ravings of a mad person. The same can be said of big foot, the loch ness monster, the bogeyman, and gods.

## The Atheist Position

Atheists can generally be placed into two categories: weak atheism and strong atheism. Weak atheism is like the case of the child I mentioned before; that is, weak atheists are agnostics. Weak atheists do not assert there are no deities, simply that they are not convinced of the claims about deities, due to a lack of evidence. It has been said that a Christian is a weak atheist about all but one deity. The Christian does not believe in Zeus, or Thor, or Allah. Why not? Because the Christian has no good reason to believe in them due to a lack of evidence. Atheists have the same lack of belief. They have simply extended it to the Christian deity as well. Strong atheism is the assertion that no deities exist as a matter of fact. There is no direct support for this position, as proving a negative is not possible. Now I should point out that some have adopted the term "strong atheist" to refer to an atheist who is *in principle* a weak atheist, but has taken it upon himself to be an activist within the atheist community. To be clear, I fall into the weak atheist category on principle. I do not assert there are no deities. I lack a belief in them. I do not assert the statement "there is no god" to be true. I simply do not accept the statement "there is a god" to be true until it can be demonstrated.

## The Problem with Agnosticism

Why then do I not call myself an agnostic? One can argue that because I am not a philosophical naturalist I am therefore an agnostic. In fact, people such as myself are often called strong agnostics.

As I mentioned earlier, when a claim has repeatedly failed to establish a burden of proof it is discarded. It is intellectually dishonest to assert such a claim as false in the sense that it has been disproven. It is, however, pragmatic to treat the statement as no better than a claim about alien abductions until such time as it can be demonstrated to be true. Once evidence has been produced in a repeatable and reliable manner that can be observed by others, then it would be rational to accept the statement as true.

The methodological naturalist therefore rejects Abrahamic religions such as Judaism, Catholicism and Islam because they have not met their burden of proof. Some claims made by these religions can be verified as true, but many of them cannot, and many of them can be demonstrated to be false. Each Faith claims to be the one true Faith. Each claims that it cannot err. And yet many of their doctrines are clearly false. I will cover some of the false claims in future episodes. Not only are some of their claims false, but many of them are also *immoral*. I am not covering these points in this episode, as this would require a longer section. The purpose of this episode is to clarify the atheist position. In later episodes I will identify the specific false claims that religions make.

In addition to my view that religion is false and some of their teachings are immoral, I also see the general underlying philosophical ideologies in religion to be harmful to society. There are good and bad religious people and atheists. However, religion enables good people to do bad things that they would otherwise not do. I shall go into those in future episodes.
