# Shaming, Guilt, and Hypocrisy: A Rant on Why I Hate the Catholic Church

In the last episode of Rational Talk, I said I'd cover evolution in the next episode. I'm taking a little break from the planned structure because of something I have seen go on long enough, and that I feel like venting about. Don't like what I have to say here? Too bad. This is my website, and I can post whatever I want.

Shaming comes in all shapes and sizes, but has been of late directed to the LGBT community, racial minorities, and women, though these are not the only groups who suffer from shaming. Why all this shaming? Why, in the U.S. in particular, do so many people feel ashamed of who they are? The answer is the way they were raised. And the harsh truth is, Judeo-Christian principles have manufactured this shaming culture and the guilt that comes with it.

I have had several recent conversations with Christians who tell me I need a God to have morals. When I point out the atrocities done under the doctrines of religion, the story changes from, I need a God to have morality, to asking me why I hate God. Do I have sin in my life? Am I secretly hiding shame? No. I am comfortable with myself because I know that rather than rely on the proclamations of an evil and corrupt institution, I rely on empiricism and the realities of the natural world to determine right or wrong. I am open to conversations where people are allowed to voice their views and concerns. The Church is not. I do not have guilt and fear of God. I don't happen to think that God exists. I do have a healthy fear of what happens when religion runs the state.

The entire foundation of Christianity is one of shame. Behave a certain way or you’re a bad person. Dress a certain way, or you’re evil. All of this is designed to shame us into being good little mindless followers while the religious leaders who seduce their followers into these beliefs at the top enjoy their power, influence, and control.

This control comes in a variety of ways. Sometimes it is exercised as an intellectual control. You are only allowed to believe what the leadership of the Church feeds you, not what physical evidence demonstrates to you. When Galileo showed our planet was orbiting the Sun, he was sent to court for his “crimes of heresy”. You know how that worked out? The Catholic court concluded the following (taken from the [Galileo trial documents, Feb. 24, 1616](http://www.tc.umn.edu/~allch001/galileo/library/1616docs.htm)):

    All said that this proposition is foolish and absurd in philosophy, and formally heretical since it explicitly contradicts many places the sense of Holy Scripture, according to the literal meaning of the words and according to the common interpretation and understanding of the Holy Fathers and the doctors of theology.

Theology. That’s the reason why Galileo was placed under trial for his discovery, held under arrest, censored, and threatened. Was he wrong? No. Has the Church recanted the Galileo case? Yes. They’ve been forced to admit that they were wrong, and that their theology was wrong. But before modern times, the Church was adamant about their cult of locking people up for finding out the truth about reality or, worse yet, the punishment could often be death. [Yes, people have been put to death simply because they believed differently than what the Church taught](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_people_burned_as_heretics#Roman_Catholic_Countries).

So if the Church was so wrong, and eventually came to admit it was wrong, why should we trust any of the other dogmas it teaches? What about its teachings on sex? The Church clergy care an awful lot about what other people are doing in the bedroom, yet do nothing about their own child abuse problem. During the Renaissance in Florence, a young boy named Giovanni di Giovanni was castrated and burned between the thighs with a red-hot iron by court order under the Catholic laws against homosexuality (Rocke, Michael (1996). Forbidden Friendships, Homosexuality and Male Culture in Renaissance Florence. Oxford University Press. pp. 24, 227, 356, 360. ISBN 0-19-512292-5).

But it goes even further than that, let’s tell women that they should be ashamed of their bodies and hide them. I have seen women shamed for their appearance, for the fact that they are women. They're shamed because of the clothing they choose to wear. Women are shamed because they don't fit the "ideal body type". This shaming comes from a Church that preaches a purity cult mentality that has put people to death who don't agree with it. Let's make women feel bad about themselves, because it keeps women subservient to men who can't bear the thought that some women are better than some men. Under Catholic doctrine, women are reduced to sexual chattel. They are purely intended for the purpose of making babies and following their husbands' orders.

I haven't yet mentioned the atrocities committed by the Catholic Church that have only come to light in recent decades. I'm talking about the child abuse scandal. According to the John Jay report, during 1950 to 2002, a total of 10,667 individuals had made allegations of child sexual abuse. Of these, the dioceses had been able to identify 6,700 unique accusations against 4,392 clergy over that period in the USA. But what has the Church's response been to the abuses? Shuffling priests around so they can be better hidden, to keep the situation quiet. The same report found that bishops were actually aware of these problems, and failed to report them to the police to avoid a public scandal. Truth is a funny thing&mdash;it tends to come out anyway. This has prompted legislators to pass laws making it compulsory to report abuse.

Keep in mind this is the same Church that tells responsible and consenting adults that having sex outside of the perverted definitions of the Church is sinful. It's the same Church that has put consenting adults to death because of their completely natural sexual desires and the exercise of those desires with other consenting adults. We are humans, apes on the tree of life. Sex is a part of who we are. Heterosexuality and homosexuality are naturally occurring within the animal kingdom. It's how our species survives. Shaming adults for having sexual desires and then carrying them out in a responsible, safe way is evil.

If you don't agree with what I've stated here, guess what? I don't care. You're part of the problem. Fortunately, there are enough people out there who are moral and decent and won't put people to death for being different, and their numbers are growing. To the rest of the world that believes in sadistic totalitarianism&mdash;to the Catholic Church and to those who would enforce Judeo-Christian religious "morality" on others&mdash;Fuck you!
